Explain potential ambiguity of providing inverse functions (#2901)
modelica/ModelicaSpecification: chapters/functions.tex

The function in the \lstinline!inverse! annotation must be an actual inverse.
This requires that $f_2$ is such that, if $u_k$ is calculated as \lstinline!$u_k$ := $f_2$($\ldots$, y, $\ldots$)!, the equality \lstinline!y = $f_1$($\ldots$, $u_k$, $\ldots$)! is satisfied up to a certain precision, for all valid values of the input arguments of \lstinline!$f_2$($\ldots$, y, $\ldots$)!.

\begin{nonnormative}
There is no guarantee that a provided inverse will be used, and no rule for at which stage of symbolic processing it could be applied.
Hence, providing an inverse function cannot be used as a means to select a particular solution to a nonlinear equation with multiple solutions (in other words, to select particular pre-image for a non-injective function).

> On the contrary, providing an inverse function can make a model ambiguous, as it won't be known if an equation is solved using a generic nonlinear equation solver (with solution being influenced by guess values), or solved using the provided inverse (possibly selecting a different solution).

Reviewer: I don't see how this make the model "ambiguous", as this only applies if the equation already have multiple solutions.
(For "won't" see comment below).

I would either just remove it or rewrite it as:

Providing an inverse function can even make a model result more ambiguous in some cases.
This can occur if the model equations have multiple solutions, since the inverse can select a different solution than the generic nonlinear equation solver (whose solution is influenced by guess values).
However, if the original function is bijective this is not an issue.

Author: The point is that nonlinear equations with multiple solutions is a kind of ambiguity that it is standard to handle by providing guess values near the desired solution.  The kind of ambiguity added by inverse functions is worse, since it puts the guess value control out of play.

Reviewer: Yes, but the guess value isn't always fully reliable since it depends on the solver method and its region of convergence. The point was that even if an inverse can make this worse it cannot create it from thin air.

Author: Sure, it's not a fully reliable mechanism, yet…

But regarding the fast that problems don't come out of thin air, I suggest that we reconsider the decision to allow inverse functions when there are multiple possible solutions, see comment above.

Reviewer: I still think that this should be corrected to indicate that the underlying problem is that there are multiple inverses to the function (or in other words that the function is not injective). Specifying inverses may make this worse. If we want to have a better solution for this we add some mechanism for sending in guess-values for the unknown to the inverse; but that's for the future.

Author: I realize that this conversation is now being continued [below](#discussion_r604077247).  Leaving it as unresolved for now, so that comments remain visible, but please don't add more comments here.

Author: Now that the continued discussion has been resolved, it's time to also resolve this one.

> While it is possible to have several inverse functions that could be applied to solve the same equation, the real problem of ambiguity isn't the number of applicable inverse functions, but that there is ambiguity as soon as there is one inverse function and multiple solutions.

Reviewer: We generally don't use contractions such as "isn't" in the text.

Author: Fixed, along with a few more in the new description of figure annotations.  Resolving.

> While it is possible to have several inverse functions that could be applied to solve the same equation, the real problem of ambiguity is not the number of applicable inverse functions, but that there is ambiguity as soon as there is one inverse function and multiple solutions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While it is possible to have several inverse functions that could be applied to solve the same equation, the real problem of ambiguity is not the number of applicable inverse functions, but that there is ambiguity as soon as there are multiple solutions.
Although an inverse function do not create this issue it can make it worse, in particular since it lacks access to the previous value to ensure continuity of the solution.
```

Reviewer 2: In @HansOlsson's suggestion above the last sentence: "Although an inverse function do not..."  -> "... does not..."

Reviewer: Updated!

Author: I think this change is worth discussing in some depth before applying, as it changes the original intention.

The main question is this: Do we really want to consider the existence of multiple solutions a problem on its own?  I mean, is any model having an equation with multiple solutions a problematic model?  I was hoping that we wouldn't have to be so hard on all these models – that Modelica is an environment where this can be considered normal, and that the combination of guess values and tracking of solutions over time are essential features that can make this possible.

Of course, it's not hard to come up with models where the existence multiple solutions (without any inverse functions) is really causing problems, for a number of different reasons.  But is the fact that some models have problems really reason to also consider the working ones problematic?

The point I was trying to make in the original formulation is that multiple solutions combined with an inverse function is where the real problem begins.  Since one can't control whether the inverse function will be used, the user will have to make sure that the same solution is obtained both when the inverse function is used and when it isn't.  To see what the solution is when it isn't used is tedious but easy – just remove the annotation – but making sure that the provided inverse function gives the same solution will require relatively advanced debugging of the translated model.

Maybe we won't have to bring this all the way back to a phone meeting poll, but considering @gkurzbach's [recent comment in a completely different issue](https://github.com/modelica/ModelicaSpecification/pull/2748#issuecomment-802814326), it would be interesting to at least hear from him.  @eshmoylova, should your comment on just the grammatical part be taken as being in favor of the change of intention?

Author: Reformulating an idea from the thread above, I also see a way out where changing the intention as proposed would make sense to me: To explicitly state that the effects of providing an inverse function are undefined when there are multiple solutions.  Then the introduction of inverse functions cannot make the situation worse, so the only problem that remains is the existence of multiple solutions.

(As we only use formulations with _undefined_ on rare occasions, it might be better to reformulate as a requirement that tools are not expected to verify.)

Reviewer: > To explicitly state that the effects of providing an inverse function are undefined when there are multiple solutions. Then the introduction of inverse functions cannot make the situation worse, so the only problem that remains is the existence of multiple solutions.

Yes, the actual problem are multiple solution; and that was the point I was trying to make. How serious that problem is depends on the situation.

However, if we want to formulate it in other ways we have to be careful and not over-use undefined: many standards differentiate between undefined, implementation-defined and selecting among a few possible definitions as in this case.

Author: > However, if we want to formulate it in other ways we have to be careful and not over-use undefined: many standards differentiate between undefined, implementation-defined and selecting among a few possible definitions as in this case.

Yes.  At a glance, I can currently see only two uses of this phrasing: numeric overflow and impure functions in an algebraic loop.  While I find it hard to come up with something better for numeric overflow, I find the case of impure functions in an algebraic loop very similar to the current problem with inverse functions and multiple solutions.

Reviewer: To me it depends, similarly as the _potential_ for numeric overflow.

Consider y=x^2 and giving the inverse sqrt(y). If all values were strictly above some positive number the fact that the function had multiple solution and the inverse picked one isn't a problem. (That could happen if the x is a temperature.)
But if x is negative or changes sign it's bad and using start-values etc will not always guarantee the correct solution.

That's why I don't think we should consider multiple solutions as very bad and undefined gives that feel; and also why I think that we shouldn't say that it's an issue with inverses - but with multiple solutions.

Author: You are pointing to a technical detail of my original proposal, which I excluded for brevity when repeating the idea: to avoid ending up in "undefined" territory – that is, to fulfill the injectiveness requirement before providing an inverse function – it is OK to take a informally specified domain of the function into consideration.

While possible to also express a function domain somewhat formally using asserts, there is little reason to require such formalization, since there is generally no practical way to verify the injectiveness property anyway.

A valid form of your example would thus be:
```
function squareNonNegative
  input Real x "Non-negative number";
  output Real y = x * x;
algorithm
  /* An assert can be used to make function domain somewhat explicit,
   * but is not required to specify an inverse function:
   */
//assert(x >= 0, "Invalid domain.");
  annotation(inverse(y = sqrt(x)));
end squareNonNegative;
```

Since it is completely unspecified how the function domain should be given, the following would also be a valid use of an inverse function as long as the function is only used on a domain where the inverse is correct:
```
function inverseOfSqrt
  input Real x;
  output Real y = x * x;
algorithm
  annotation(inverse(y = sqrt(x)));
end inverseOfSqrt;
```

Reviewer: But I don't see how that prevents us from specifying that the underlying problem is attempting to invert non-injective functions, and that it works if the domain is in practice restricted.

Author: It's not an attempt at preventing us from saying that.  It's an attempt at saying that, but in a more formal manner: Instead of saying that validly providing inverse functions to non-injective functions can lead to trouble, we say that specifying inverse function isn't supported/legal/defined unless the function being inverted is effectively injective, considering an informally defined function domain when there is one.

Reviewer: I still don't understand why my proposal above is controversial. The underlying issue is that we have a non-injective function and try to invert it; and we should present as the issue - not scare away users from providing inverses.

Author: I'm trying to avoid a situation where the specification should be blamed for allowing inverses to be defined in ill-defined ways.  You may be right that one needs to be careful not not scare people away from providing inverse functions when it is safe to do so, but I'm not at all against scaring users away from providing inverses in the ill-defined situations.

Reviewer: My point is that the ill-defined situations are already problematic - because we have a non-injective functions that we for some reason try to invert. The inverses might make it a bit worse, but they don't create the problem.

Author: I think we have at least clearly identified the two different viewpoints, and isn't deciding between the two a very good topic for the phone meeting (hoping for enough attendance so that the language group can be considered informed and listened to)?

Author: Resolved according to phone meeting decision in https://github.com/modelica/ModelicaSpecification/pull/2901#issuecomment-831320374.

> Since ambiguity is inherent when inverse functions are provided, a tool shall not give any diagnostic regarding ambiguity due to use of inverse functions, even when making a choice between several applicable ones.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the ambiguity is inherent for a non-injective function, a tool shall not give any diagnostic regarding the potential ambiguity due to use of inverse functions, even when making a choice between several applicable ones.
```

Author: To be resolved in agreement with conclusion to [discussion above](#discussion_r605210673).

Author: This has now been resolved according to phone meeting decision in https://github.com/modelica/ModelicaSpecification/pull/2901#issuecomment-831320374.

\end{lstlisting}
\end{example}

Tools are not expected to verify the bijectiveness requirement, meaning that it is the user's responsibility to ensure that this requirement is fulfilled, and that tools can rely on the requirement as an assumption for symbolic manipulations when an inverse function is provided.

There is no guarantee that a provided inverse will be used, and no rule for at which stage of symbolic processing it could be applied.

> Inlining a function means that the possibility to apply provided inverses is lost, so choosing the right variant of the function inlining alternatives can be important when inverse functions are provided.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Inlining a function means that the possibility to apply provided inverses is lost, thus inlining should normally be performed after the inverse is potentially used. Tools should ideally do this automatically, but choosing the right variant of the function inlining alternatives can be helpful.
```

Author: Probably a good suggestion, but I think I just need some help here understanding the part of what tools should ideally do?

Author: Right (but remembering the non-inlined function seems terribly complicated).  Can this be stated more concretely as that tools making a choice in the absence of any inlining annotation should not inline more eagerly than with `LateInline = true`?

Similarly, for the case of making an explicit choice of inlining annotation, would it be too strong to recommend picking one of `Inline = false` or `LateInline = true`, and saying this before telling what tools should do?
```suggestion
Inlining a function means that the possibility to apply provided inverses is lost.
Hence, the recommended inlining annotations -- if any -- for use together with the \lstinline!inverse!-annotation is either \lstinline!Inline = false! or \lstinline!LateInline = true!.
A tool choosing when to inline in the absence of any inlining annotation should not inline more eagerly than with \lstinline!LateInline = true!.
```

Reviewer: > Right (but remembering the non-inlined function seems terribly complicated). Can this be stated more concretely as that tools making a choice in the absence of any inlining annotation should not inline more eagerly than with `LateInline = true`?

I would prefer to not over-constrain implementations, and as I recall it is sometimes necessary to inline before late inlining - but I cannot remember the details at the moment.

Author: Sure, finding the right balance between over- and underspecifying is important, and perhaps `LateInline = true` was too restrictive.  The problem with under-specifying too much is that users end up having to set `LateInline = true` or `Inline = false` to make their inverse work as they expect across tools.  If I recall correctly, System Modeler doesn't automatically inline before `LateInline = true` when no `inverse` is present, and I am not aware of any problems due to this.  Maybe we should find a compromise to further weaken the _should not_ (which is already weaker than _must not_) to something like _is recommended not to_?

Alternatively, we could skip the entire sentence about what tools should do for now, and instead open a separate issue about the need to set either `LateInline = true` or `Inline = false` to get `inverse` functions that can be expected to work across tools.

Reviewer 2: We also state on the line just above: "There is no guarantee that a provided inverse will be used, and no rule for at which stage of symbolic processing it could be applied." A tool deciding to inline might be one of those cases where it is not guaranteed that the inverse is used. So maybe  it is best to open a separate ticket.

Reviewer: I would prefer to also remove "Hence, the recommended inlining annotations -- if any -- for use together with the \lstinline!inverse!-annotation is either \lstinline!Inline = false! or \lstinline!LateInline = true!."
So that we view it more as tool-responsibility than user-responsibility.

Author: I agree with the goal of making it primarily a tool responsibility, but as pointed out in #2942, one currently needs to specify inlining if one wants to be sure that the provided inverse will be applicable when needed in all tools.  The current formulation doesn't go as far as to say that an inlining alternative _should_ be specified, only which ones are reasonable to use, **if any**.

Reviewer: To me that is all tool responsibility, and we don't want to tell users that they should be careful with Inline-settings if tools can and do handle it better. Saying nothing until we have resolved it in #2942 seems like the best action.

Reviewer 2: I think the best may be to remove the lines 1628-9 (Inlining a function means that the possibility to apply provided inverses is lost.....) for now. It may be decided in #2942 that the tool should not inline them if there is the inverse annotation.

Author: I consider #2942 a separate question.  These two sentences are advice for humans.  Would it be better if it was formulated as a recommendation against combining with `Inline = true` or `InlineAfterIndexReduction = true`?

Reviewer: I also consider it as advice to humans, and I don't want such advice for working around limitations in tools if there's no need for that. Especially not, if we will later improve the specification to avoid it altogether.

Author: I don't think the need to discuss what humans should or shouldn't do can be avoided entirely as long as the possibility to add explicit inlining annotations exist – even if tools are required to make something intelligent when no inlining annotations are given, it would be a bad idea to add an explicit `Inline = true`.

Reviewer: I disagree. If tools can make an intelligent choice (as they can in this case), we shouldn't warn users and persuade them to go for the lowest common denominator.
We want to encourage tools (and users) to improve - and the best way to do that is not add such restrictions; not to provide work-arounds for previous or existing limitation.

Author: I kind of disagree to disagree.  Neither do I want to persuade users to go for a lowest common denominator by getting in the way of tools that are supposed to do the right thing by themselves.  Further, yes, we should encourage tools to improve (but not sure what you mean with users here).

To understand your conclusion, however, I need to understand better what you mean by _previous or existing limitation_.  Maybe I'm lost in this discussion because I still think of the various inlining annotations per se as a feature – not a limitation – of the language?

Reviewer: I view both inverse and inlining annotations as features that takes care to implement in tools, including their interactions - and I know that we previously had limitations in Dymola in dealing with them in a good way.
Thus I prefer to not mention this in this PR, but discuss future possibilities in #2942

Author: But #2942 is about what tools should be expected to take care of automatically.  This is about stopping users from getting in the way of their tools by adding the most blatantly incompatible combinations of annotations.

To be concrete: Can anyone give any examples of useful combinations of `inverse` and either `Inline = true` or `InlineAfterIndexReduction = true`?  If not, why shouldn't we let the readers know that these combinations don't make much sense?

Then, once we figure out what to expect from automatic logic in tools in #2942, we should be able make even stronger recommendations for the users, telling them to avoid combining `inverse` with any of the inlining annotations.

Reviewer: > But #2942 is about what tools should be expected to take care of automatically. This is about stopping users from getting in the way of their tools by adding the most blatantly incompatible combinations of annotations.
> 
> To be concrete: Can anyone give any examples of useful combinations of `inverse` and either `Inline = true` or `InlineAfterIndexReduction = true`? If not, why shouldn't we let the readers know that these combinations don't make much sense?

Ok, I'm convinced.

Author: Good, resolving.

\end{example}

\begin{example}
If an inverse is provided, but the surjectiveness part of the bijectiveness requirement is not fulfilled, this may introduce an invalid solution to equations that do not have a solution at all.
Consider the following invalid use of the \lstinline!inverse! annotation:
\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]
model NotSurjective
  function cube
    input Real x;
    output Real y = x ^ 3;
  end cube;

  function cbrtPos "Cubic root of positive number"
    input Real y;
    output Real x;
  algorithm
    assert(y > 0, "Argument must be positive.");
    x := exp(log(y) / 3);
    annotation(inverse(y = cube(x))); // Invalid!
  end cbrtPos;

  Real x = 0.5 + sin(time);
  Real y;
equation
  cbrtPos(y) = x; // Calling cbrtPos requires y > 0.
  annotation(experiment(StopTime = 10.0));
end NotSurjective;
\end{lstlisting}
As the value of \lstinline!x! varies over the interval $[-1,\, 1]$, but the range of \lstinline!cbrtPos! is only $(0, \infty)$, the informal codomain of \lstinline!cbrtPos! cannot be restricted such that the surjectiveness is fulfilled.

> A valid solution to the equation in \lstinline!x! and \lstinline!y! must satisfy $\text{\lstinline!y!} > 0$, and when no \lstinline!inverse! annotation is given, an violation will be detected by a nonlinear solver applied directly to the equation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A valid solution to the equation in \lstinline!x! and \lstinline!y! must satisfy $\text{\lstinline!y!} > 0$, and when no \lstinline!inverse! annotation is given, a violation will be detected by a nonlinear solver applied directly to the equation.
```
